



WIMSE                                                        J. Lombardo
Internet-Draft                                                       AWS
Intended status: Informational                                   M. Levy
Expires: 2 January 2026                                            SPIRL
                                                              D. H. Saxe
                                         Full Frontal Nerdity Industries
                                                             1 July 2025


      draft-lombardo-wimse-workload-identity-authentication-levels
  draft-lombardo-wimse-workload-identity-authentication-levels-latest

Abstract

   This document defines a framework for Machine Identity Assurance
   Levels (MIAL) and Machine Authentication Assurance Levels (MAAL) to
   establish consistent, verifiable trust in machine-to-machine
   communications.

About This Document

   This note is to be removed before publishing as an RFC.

   The latest revision of this draft can be found at
   https://identitymonk.github.io/draft-lombardo-wimse-workload-
   identity-authentication-levels/draft-lombardo-wimse-workload-
   identity-authentication-levels.html.  Status information for this
   document may be found at https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-
   lombardo-wimse-workload-identity-authentication-levels/.

   Discussion of this document takes place on the WIMSE Working Group
   mailing list (mailto:wimse@ietf.org), which is archived at
   https://mailarchive.ietf.org/arch/browse/wimse/.  Subscribe at
   https://www.ietf.org/mailman/listinfo/wimse/.

   Source for this draft and an issue tracker can be found at
   https://github.com/identitymonk/draft-lombardo-wimse-workload-
   identity-authentication-levels.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 2 January 2026.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2025 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Revised BSD License text as
   described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Revised BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction
     1.1.  Background
     1.2.  Scope
   2.  Conventions and Definitions
   3.  Framework Overview
     3.1.  Machine Identity Assurance Levels (MIAL)
       3.1.1.  Level MIAL-0
       3.1.2.  Level MIAL-1
       3.1.3.  Level MIAL-2
       3.1.4.  Level MIAL-3
       3.1.5.  Level MIAL-4
     3.2.  Machine Authentication Assurance Levels (MAAL)
       3.2.1.  Credential provider provenance
       3.2.2.  Credential enrollment
       3.2.3.  Credential containment
       3.2.4.  Credential unlocking
       3.2.5.  Credential boundary
       3.2.6.  Credential reuse
       3.2.7.  Credential recovery
       3.2.8.  Credential governance
       3.2.9.  Level MAAL-0
   4.  Security Considerations
   5.  IANA Considerations
   6.  References
     6.1.  Normative References
     6.2.  Informative References
   Acknowledgments
   Authors' Addresses

1.  Introduction

1.1.  Background

   With the increasing complexity of distributed systems,
   containerization, and cloud-native architectures, machine and
   workload identity has become a critical security cornerstone.  While
   for human identity standards guidance such as [NIST.SP.800-63]
   provides comprehensive frameworks for human identity assurance and
   authentication, there is no equivalent standard for machine and
   workload identities.

   This document defines a framework for Machine Identity Assurance
   Levels (MIAL) and Machine Authentication Assurance Levels (MAAL) to
   establish consistent, verifiable trust in machine-to-machine
   communications.

1.2.  Scope

   This standard addresses: - Machine identity proofing and verification
   requirements - Machine authentication mechanisms and protocols -
   Hardware-based security integration - Supply chain validation
   requirements - Runtime attestation and continuous verification -
   Cross-environment identity federation - Workload identity lifecycle
   management

2.  Conventions and Definitions

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
   "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in
   BCP 14 [RFC2119] [RFC8174] when, and only when, they appear in all
   capitals, as shown here.

   The following terms are defined for use in this document:

   *  Machine Identity: A set of unique metadata and identifier
      associated with a hardware device, virtual machine, container, or
      workload.

   *  Workload: A discrete computing task or application running in a
      distributed environment.

   *  Attestation: The process of providing evidence about the state of
      a machine or workload.

   *  Identity Proofing: The process of verifying the claimed identity
      of a machine or workload.

   *  Authentication: The process of verifying the authenticity of a
      machine or workload identity.

3.  Framework Overview

   The Machine Identity Assurance and Authentication Framework consists
   of two primary components:

3.1.  Machine Identity Assurance Levels (MIAL)

   MIAL defines the degree of confidence in the claimed identity of a
   machine or workload.  This includes:

   *  Identity attestation and proofing

   *  Deployment environment (e.g. virtual machine, Kubernetes)
      verification

   *  Software integrity verification

   *  Configuration validation

   *  Supply chain validation

   Note that these levels do not require hardware security integration,
   but see Section 4.

3.1.1.  Level MIAL-0

   There is no requirement to link a given machine or workload to an
   identity.  Although an identity may be optionally provided, there is
   no process for identity attestation or proofing.  Different machines
   or workloads cannot be definitively distinguished from each other.

3.1.2.  Level MIAL-1

   Machines or workloads are authenticated solely by credential (e.g.,
   API key).  Credentials or keys are provided without any attestation.
   Different machines or workloads that present the same credential
   cannot be definitively distinguished from each other.

3.1.3.  Level MIAL-2

   Machines or workloads are provided with identities via an attestation
   and proofing process that is rooted in the underlying deployment
   environment.  These identities can be cryptographically authenticated
   by relying parties.  Different machines or workloads can be
   definitively distinguished from each other via these identities.

3.1.4.  Level MIAL-3

   In addition to the conditions in MIAL-3, the machines or workloads
   undergo software integrity verification, and configuration
   validation.  This necessarily includes supply chain validation.

3.1.5.  Level MIAL-4

   In addition to the conditions in MIAL-4, the underlying deployment
   environment undergoes some form of verification, appropriate to its
   implementation.

3.2.  Machine Authentication Assurance Levels (MAAL)

   MAAL defines the strength of an authentication nechanism used by
   workload to authenticate.  This includes:

3.2.1.  Credential provider provenance

   This represents the level of trust in the authenticator.

3.2.2.  Credential enrollment

   This represents the requirements for the credential to exist.

3.2.3.  Credential containment

   This represents the constraints on how and where the credential can
   be stored.

3.2.4.  Credential unlocking

   This represents how the credential can be accessed for authentication
   purposes.

3.2.5.  Credential boundary

   This represents the constraints on where the credential can be used.

3.2.6.  Credential reuse

   This represents if and how one credential exist for more than one
   resource.

3.2.7.  Credential recovery

   This represents the constraints on how the credential can be
   recoevered if somthing goes wrong.

3.2.8.  Credential governance

   This represents the rules that govern the credential lifecycle.

3.2.9.  Level MAAL-0

4.  Security Considerations

   The workloads and machines in the Machine Identity Assurance Levels
   (MIAL) ultimately rely on the underlying deployment environment.  In
   the case of deployment environment verification defined in MIAL-4,
   this is ideally rooted in hardware integrity techniques and devices,
   including but not limited to:

   *  Public key infrastructure (PKI) using Hardware Security Modules
      (HSMs)

   *  Trusted Platform Modules (TPMs)

   *  Secure Enclaves

   However, these techniques are not feasible across the range of
   deployment environments in common usage.  Therefore, none of the
   MIALs require their use.

   TODO Security

5.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no IANA actions.

6.  References

6.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc2119>.

   [RFC8174]  Leiba, B., "Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC
              2119 Key Words", BCP 14, RFC 8174, DOI 10.17487/RFC8174,
              May 2017, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8174>.

6.2.  Informative References

   [NIST.SP.800-63]
              Grassi, P. A., Ed., Garcia, M. E., Ed., and J. L. Fenton,
              Ed., "NIST Special Publication 800-63 Digital Identity
              Guidelines", June 2017,
              <https://pages.nist.gov/800-63-3/>.

Acknowledgments

   The authors wants to acknowledge the support and work of the
   following indivisuals: Ryan Hurst (Peculiar Ventures), Pamela Dingle
   (Microsoft).

   The authors wants also to recognize the trail blazers and thought
   leaders that created the ecosystem without which this draft proposal
   would not be able to solve customer pain points and secure usage of
   digital services, especially without being limited to: Vittorio
   Bertocci†, Brian Campbell (Ping Identity), Justin Richer (MongoDB),
   Aaron Parecki (Okta), Pieter Kasselman (SPIRL), Dr Mike Jones (Self-
   Issued Consulting, LLC), Dr Daniel Fett (Authlete).

Authors' Addresses

   Jean-François Lombardo
   AWS
   Email: jeffsec@amazon.com


   Marcel Levy
   SPIRL
   Email: marcel@spirl.com


   Dean H. Saxe
   Full Frontal Nerdity Industries
   Email: dean@thesax.es
